# What if Git worked with Programming Languages?

I use git most days of the week. And for the great majority of my
commits, this means committing.

So why would I say something like *What if Git worked with Programming
Languages*?

Well, the title is deliberately provocative, but I genuinely mean it,
and it's not wrong: Git does *not* work with programming
languages. Instead it works with source files of text.

## A Short History of Version History

I absolutely love git, and I love what it has done to the
development process even more.

I also remember the bad old days of revision control. I used *file*
based revision control on VMS. I've used CVS, subversion (svn), and
visual source safe in development environments.

The pain and torment these systems caused me has been quite
successfully sublimated into my unconscious mind, only rising to the
surface when I'm forced to think about the history of revision
control.

The fundamentally multi-master approach of git, combined with the
concepts of CI/CD have yielded enormous benefits. They've actually
made my life better.

But they've also made collaboration better. I'm still learning about
the potential to improve software develpment on a nearly weekly
basis. In my opinion the well of possibilities in most development
houses is probably not yet fully tapped.

Automatic testing, including unit tests or even very sophisticated
integration testing becomes enormously simpler with the ability to
create the *hypothetical commits* of a pull request. It's essentially
like having a [modal
logic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Possible_world) at our disposal
for reasoning about correctness.

But it would be hubris to think that this is the the end of history


